A c
5.  The Editor
C Y15 c
Werner Winiger  4.8.82  (Version I.10)
B Y20
5.1.  Introduction
+
The Lilith text editor is started by typing its name "edit" followed by RETURN.  It presents you the screen image shown in fig.1. 

w410

The screen is divided into a text area (38 lines of 91 characters), a scroll bar 
at the left hand side, and a communication bar at the bottom.  The text area serves to 
show you parts of the document you are working on.  With the help of the scroll 
bar you may 
position this document such that you see the desired sections.  In the communication 
line you get messages from the editor, you have to enter file names and search strings 
and you see the file name of the document being edited.  Not always visible is a 
menu.  It appears as a box containing the keywords of the available commands.

The input devices which allow you to give your commands to the program, are the 
keyboard and the mouse.  Typing on the keyboard usually means that you want to insert 
new characters into your text.  Exceptions are
n x25
- when the editor asks for a file name,
- or for a search string,
- or prompts you for an assertion such as  7write the document? [Y/N]0.
+
The mouse is used to move a cursor around the screen (just by moving the mouse on the 
desk) and to indicate
n x25
- where you want to insert text,
- which characters are to be deleted,
- which line should be scrolled to the top of the screen,
+
and so on.  Furthermore, the three buttons of the mouse allow you to specify what 
action the editor should perform at the position the mouse points to.  In the 
editor's prompts, the left button is referred to as 7B10, the middle one as 7B20, 
and the right button as 7B30.
B Y20
5.2.  Starting the Editor and Entry of New Text
+
Let's follow now the procedure of preparing a new document (updating an old one 
respectively):
+ Y1
If you start the editor it prompts you for a file name.  Press RETURN to create a new 
document.  You see now as the first and only "character" of the first line an 
end-of-file mark in the form of a small (8 by 8 dot) square.  The blinking wedge 
shaped mark to its left is called the 1caret0 and denotes the location where newly 
typed text is inserted.

You may now type in your text using
n x25
- RETURN to start a new line,
- DEL to erase the character just keyed in,
- TAB to get two blanks,
- CAPS to capitalize the following alphabetic characters.
+ f3 
On the current Lilith keyboard you have to hit CTRL-I or the key labeled 
ON LINE to get a TAB.  The CAPS function is called by pressing CTRL-N or HOME,
and HELP, which is mentioned later, is the name of CTRL-S, TAB or "?".
+
If you reach the bottom of the text-window your document is scrolled up 
automatically.  And after a while you will have a text, just as if you had entered a 
file name at the beginning of the session instead of RETURN only.  So now we can 
discuss the general case of dealing with an existing document.

When typing the file name you don't have to enter the extension, if you want to 
edit a Modula program.  MOD is the default extension which is appended automatically,
if you terminate the file name with a period.
B Y20
5.3.  Positioning the Document
+
When you enter a text, it is scrolled up such that you always see the last 38 lines of 
the document;  if you get an old document from the disk you automatically see the 
first page of that text.  But you may control which portion of the document you want 
to be visible through the available text window.  [Refer to 5.10. to find out how 
to split the text-area into several windows.]

Positioning is done with the help of the mouse and the so called scroll bar:  Move the 
mouse to the left until the cursor changes its form from an arrow "pointing to 
north-west" to a double-arrow.  Attention: if you go too far the cursor wraps around, 
but you may use the same effect to come back again.  The special form of the cursor in 
the scroll bar indicates the special mode of the mouse:  it can now be used for 
positioning.
C Y15
5.3.1.  Scrolling
+
The cursor's location in the scroll bar corresponds to the text line on the same 
hight.  It 
is possible to make this line the first (top) of the window (1to scroll up0) by 
pushing the left button, or to make it the bottom line (1scroll down0) by pushing 
the right button.  Note that you still may adjust the mouse position while the button is 
pressed because scrolling is not performed until you release it.

As a consequence you may scroll up your document by one line by pressing
the left button near the second line from the top,
or scroll it down by 37 lines (go to the previous page) by pressing the right button
near the top line.
C Y15
5.3.2.  Flipping
+
By means of scrolling you may reach only the next (or previous) few lines of your 
document easily from the current position.  But it is also desirable to make longer 
jumps, like to go to the end of the text directly, or to the beginning, and so 
on.  The editor offers such a facility: 1flipping0.  If you push the middle button 
while the cursor is in the scroll bar, the document is repositioned as follows:  the
number of lines of the text window beside the cursor is 
considered to represent the whole document.  The cursor position within these lines 
indicates which relative position within the document you want to select.  That means: 
the cursor on the last line indicates a jump to the end of the document whereas the 
cursor on 
the 13th line of the 38 indicates a jump to the first third of the document.  Again, 
the jump is executed only after you release the key.  [Refer to 5.9. to read how to 
position the document at a searched string.]
B Y20
5.4.  Insert Characters at Different Locations
+
Until now we have learned to inspect an old document or to enter a new one just by 
typing its text sequentially.  Now we also want to be able to change a document.  First 
of all, we would like to insert new text not only at the end of the document but at 
arbitrary locations.  The blinking caret denotes the location where typed characters 
are inserted.  Use the mouse to position the caret.  Move the arrow to the 
desired place, press the left button and release 
it again.  If you didn't hit well just try again (and again).  It is even allowed to 
hold down the left button during the movement of the mouse.  Then you will see the caret 
tracking the arrow.  And if you have led it to the correct position you release the left 
button.  Now the editor is ready to receive the characters to be inserted.  If the
caret sits in the middle of a word or a line and you type new text, then the rest of 
the line is shifted to the right. There is no so-called "paint mode" since deleting
is easy enough, as you see from the next section.  If a line becomes longer than 91 
characters the superfluous ones are wrapped around, and displayed on the following
line.  But they are viewed only as two lines, they still form one single line with
no end-of-line inbetween.

w430

B Y20
5.5.  Activating the Menu and Making a Selection
+
This editor doesn't expect you to type commands but lets you point to them.  Since
you would like to see as much text as possible the commands are not always 
visible but only when you need them.  Press 
the middle button (having the cursor anywhere in the 
text area) and a list of commands will be displayed near the location of the arrow 
overwriting temporarily your text.  This so-called 1menu0 will disappear as soon as
you release the middle button.  So if you want to think or make a choice keep the button 
depressed.  One of the commands is shown in reverse 
video.  In order to 
control which command should be selected you have to move the mouse.  Invoking a 
command is achieved by releasing the middle button when the associated menu item is 
inverted.  If you wish to release the middle button without causing any action, just 
move the cursor outside the menu.  In any case the menu disappears and the (eventually) 
hidden information appears again.  In case of an activated command it is executed 
immediately.

For the operations described in the following section you need to point to a 
specific portion of your document.  In the editor's terminology, you have to make
a 1selection0.
Point with the 
cursor to the first character which should be selected and press the right button.  This 
character is now shown in reverse video.  This visual feedback denotes the selected 
part of the document.  You may select one character or whole words or even several 
lines:  Press the right button at the leftmost character to be selected, hold it down, 
and move the cursor to the rightmost one.  Now the reversed portion tracks the cursor 
until you release the button.  Making a selection is, like moving around the caret, an
activity which you may use anytime and as often as you like.  The editor lets you
1edit0 the operands of its operations at your convenience unless you are satisfied
by the setup.

B Y20
5.6.  Delete, Move, or Copy Text
+
I explained how to erase accidentally typed characters, namely with the DEL key.  But 
this is not convenient for more than a few characters.  If you wish to correct 
something longer you have to select this item first with the mouse.  Once the text 
is selected as desired, it may be deleted.  This is achieved with the 
help of the menu.  Choose the DELETE command, the selected text gets 
deleted, and the rest of the text is shifted (and scrolled if necessary) in order to 
fill the gap.

The string you have deleted is kept in a buffer (until you delete another one).  It 
is possible to reinsert the contents of that buffer anywhere in the document.  This may 
be convenient in the following cases:
x25
- If you have deleted something erroneously.
x50 Y1
You may patch the situation by inserting the buffer again at the same location from 
where you have deleted it.
x25 Y1
-If you like to move some part of your text to another place. 
x50 Y1
You just delete it at the source and insert it at the destination
x25 Y1
- If you want to copy a string from one place to another.
+
How, exactly do you insert?  INSERT is just another command of the menu.  This means that 
you have to use the middle button to get the menu and then move the mouse to select the 
insert command.  When using the menu, you notice that it is always shown with that 
command exhibited which you used last.  So executing the same command several times is 
done by simply pushing the middle button shortly - once the desired command has been 
selected.

And where does the buffer get inserted?  Remember the blinking caret denoting the 
location where typed characters are placed.  The same mark is also used here.  After 
deletion of a string, the caret is located by the editor at the position of the 
resulting gap.  So, restoring the string at the same place is very simple.  For the 
purpose of moving text, however, you have to position the caret (as described
in 5.4.) prior to activation of the insert command.

Let's consider now copying a portion of a document.  Having in mind only the delete 
and the insert facility it would be necessary to delete a string and then to insert 
it twice: once at the origin and once at the destination.  To accomodate this, there 
is an abbreviating command in the menu: SAVE.  It takes the selected text (which you 
defined using the right button) and stores it in the buffer as if it had been 
deleted.  But the text remains in the document and may now be copied with the help of 
the insert command.  There is an even easier way to copy a string which may be used if
the destination is visible on the screen:  set the caret to the destination and
select the text to be copied;  now activate INSERT.  The string
will implicitly be saved into the buffer and also inserted.
B Y20
5.7.  Termination of an Editing Session
+
If you have entered a new document or updated an old one, you sometimes wish to stop 
your work.  For that purpose the editor provides the CLOSE command.  It prompts you 
with the question: 7write the document? [Y/N]0.  The 1No0 case is chosen if you want 
to exit the editor without saving the document on the disk (e.g. if you used the 
editor to inspect a file only).  To make sure that no work is lost this way the 
program asks 7exit without writing the document? [Y/N]0.  And the editor stops only 
if you insist by typing a "y".

If you have confirmed that you wish the document being saved, the editor displays 
the message 7what filename? [RETURN=backup input file]0 and the file name of the 
document you worked with.  (This name is by default DK.Temp.MOD if you entered a new 
document.)  You have now the choice to give the document a new name (what you 
normally will do if it is a new one) or to store the current version with the same 
name as the old one; in this case the old version is renamed: the extension of its 
file name is changed to BAK.  In any case you will not lose the inputfile (if there is 
any) of the edit process, so you may retrieve your 'edited' data again!  Note, 
however, that when renaming the old document to ... .BAK the file with this name 
(the grandfather of your current document) is deleted.

According to the principle of 1not typing again what you have on your display 
already0 the
editor uses the selected text as file name if there is a selection when you terminate
the session.  Reading the file name from the selection stops, however, when encountering
a terminator such as you get control again before the file is actually written: complete
or correct the name from the keyboard and confirm with RETURN that you are done.
B Y20
5.8.  Rescue from Abnormal Termination and Other Errors
+
From 5.7. it follows that our new, edited document is not written onto the disk 
while you work with it.  The document is indeed represented only by a data structure
in main memory.  This makes the case of a hard- or software error dangerous.  Is all 
your work lost in such a case?  Of course not.  You may start the editor again and 
watch what happens:  It remembers all you did and repeats the whole editing process 
again.  You may stop this so-called 1replay0 by typing any key, continue by typing 
some key again, or terminate the interrupted replay process and switch to normal 
editing with ESC.  This feature is implemented by writing all commands which you
give either with the mouse or the keyboard to a file (Edit.I10.RPL) and deleting this
file if you terminate editing normally.  Hint: it is wise to save the document onto 
the disk after a successful replay.
B Y20
5.9.  Searching
+
The FIND command allows you to search for a string which you entered from the keyboard 
or which you selected on the screen with the mouse.  When activating the command you 
have the following three possibilities:
x25
You may search for the same string as used before:  Press the left button.
This is convenient for finding all occurrences of a string.

You want to search for another string of which you have a
copy somewhere on the screen:  Select this string, by using the right button, before 
activating the find command.  This way you don't have to type the searched string.

You enter the search string from the keyboard,
terminating it with RETURN.  The editor finds the next
occurrence of the string (not containing RETURN).
+
If you forgot what the previous search string was you may ask the editor by typing
the HELP key instead of a new search string.  Searching is performed sequentially 
forward through the document starting from the position of the caret.  If the string 
can't be found a message is displayed; else the document is positioned 
such as the line containing the string is visible in the middle of the text 
window.  The caret is positioned right after the found string.  Therefore, it may be 
used as starting point to search for the next occurrence.
B Y20
5.10.  Working with Windows
+
In the previous chapters we have considered the whole text area as one window through 
which you may inspect 38 adjacent lines of your document.  The editor features, 
however, multiple windows for the same document and multiple documents in 
parallel.  Fig. 3 shows a screen with two documents of which the first has three windows.

w415

C Y15
5.10.1.  Open a Window
+
To open an additional window within an already existing document you first have to activate the 
WINDOW command and then determine, using the mouse and the left button, where the 
separating bar has to be drawn.  Again, it is allowed to hold the left button down 
and then move the mouse:  the bar follows the cursor as long as you don't go out of 
bounds.  A window must contain at least five lines.  If you have opened several 
windows for a document you may position them independently, and inspect different 
parts of the document jointly despite the fact that there are hidden parts of text 
between them.  You're also allowed to extend a selection over window bars.  The invisible
part inbetween is treated as being selected too.
C Y15
5.10.2.  Open a Document
+
It is furthermore desirable and possible to have windows connected with other 
documents:  Use the right button instead of the left button when creating the 
window.  The bar, which is drawn then, is not dashed like for a normal window 
but it is a solid line.  And the program asks you for a file name, just like at the 
beginning (where you implicitly created the first document).  For the second and 
the subsequent documents the default extension is no longer MOD but LST.  And there 
is also a default name, namely the name of the document opened before.  The editor 
has the same conventions for entering file names as described in section 4.2.3.  Having
a string selected when opening a new document causes these characters to be interpreted
as the file name. 
C Y15
5.10.3.  Change the Size of a Window
+
In the window command, the left button has another meaning if it is pressed while the 
cursor is located above the last line of a window.  The cursor then picks up the 
associated bar and moves it up or down following the mouse.  This implies that you 
may change the size of an existing window.
C Y15
5.10.4.  Close a Window or a Document
+
If you want to remove a window you have to activate the CLOSE command.  If there 
is more than one window the editor prompts you 7close which window? [B1]0.  You have 
to denote the window by moving the cursor inside it and pressing the left button.

Closing the uppermost window of a document, even if there are some more open, is 
associated with closing the whole document.  You have then to perform the necessary 
dialog as described in 5.7. in order to define whether that document should be stored 
on the disk and, if so, which name it should have.  If the document to be closed is not
the topmost one then the editor doesn't doublecheck in case you indicate closing
without writing.

Care has to be taken if there are documents which have, besides the extension, the 
same file name (e.g. x.MOD and x.DEF).  They cannot all be renamed to get the extension
BAK.  Therefore, the editor uses the extension BAK for the first which you back
up, BAL for the second, and so on.

Closing the topmost document, even if there are some more open, is associated with 
leaving the editor.  If you want to do this without writing the document you 
have to assert your intention.  Writing is only applicable to the document you close
explicitly.  So, if there are further documents when you close the topmost one, they 
are implicitly closed too, but without writing.

After you have closed a document using the default backup scheme, which renamed the
inputfile to ... .BAK, you must not try to do a replay in case 
of a crash without renaming the files to the names they had at the beginning of 
the interrupted editing session.
B Y20
5.11.  Accelerators
+
Editors are usually too simple and not handsome enough for experts 1or0 too complex
for beginners or casual users.  The method to delete, copy, or move text as described
in 5.6. is intended to be easily understandable but it requires
invoking the menu once or twice after the selection is made and the caret 
positioned.  For skilled users, the editor features a faster way to achieve the
same results.  While holding down the right button to define a selection you may also
associate a 1type0 with the selection.  There are delete-, copy-, and 
move-selections.  If you release the right button and the selection has such a type,
the editor performs the appropriate operation:  with a delete-selection the 
selected text just disappears, with a copy-selection it is copied to the location of
the caret, and with a move-selection it is deleted at the source and inserted at the
destination (denoted by the caret again).

There are two ways to define the type of a selection: from the keyboard or with mouse
buttons.  If you prefer to use your left hand and the keyboard proceed as 
follows:  Hit "d" for 1delete0, "c" for 1copy0, or "s" (because of its neighborhood 
to d and c) for 1move0.  You will receive a visual feedback.  A delete-selection has
a dashed bottom edge, a copy-selection a dashed top, and a move-selection has both
(because you delete 2and0 copy).  The selection type is a toggle, so typing "d"
twice turns on and off again the delete-selection.  Furthermore you are allowed to
switch from one type to another.  Hitting "d" followed by "c" produces a 
copy-selection.  Remember to keep depressing the right button all the 
time.  If you prefer 
to use the left and the middle button of the mouse instead you have to know the
following encoding:  the left button corresponds to the delete-selection, the middle 
one to the copy-selection, and both together to the move-selection.

But before you can do some practising, your user profile must be edited in order to 
direct the editor to support one way of getting selection types or the other.  Read
the following section on the function and format of the user profile.
B Y20
5.12.  User Profile and User Guidance
+
A key word of today's editors is 2user taylorability0.  The Lilith editor has a few
functions which may be turned on or off via the file 1User.Profile0.  This text
file is mainly a list of options which should be active for a given user.  It may be
edited as desired and when starting the editor the next time the options will be set
accordingly.  If no profile is available the editor generates a default file containing:
= x25
"Editor"
'Version'           I.10
'SelectionFeedBack' inverted
'Caret'             after insertion
'Umlaut'            per default
+
The meaning of these entries is that you are using version I.10 of the editor, that you
want to see selected text in reverse video, that you would like the caret to be moved
behind an inserted (or copied or moved) string, and that the editor should start in
the umlaut mode.  If you don't like a particular option (e.g. those bright rectangles
for selection feedback) you may delete the associated entry from the user profile
and the editor will behave the way you specify.  Note, however, that it is not possible
to get version 1.8 of the editor running by editing the version number!  This entry
merely serves to indicate to a newly released editor that you just have started it the
first time and that it should give you some advice on the differences between this and
the previous version.  Section 5.13. tells you more about 
umlauts.  The other options will be discussed here.  

The alternative to selection feedback by inverse video is a triangular mark at the left 
end
of the selection and a similar mark at the right end thus avoiding large differences
in the brightness level of your screen.  As a side effect it is no longer possible
to have the selection types which are described in 5.11.

Not moving the caret behind inserted portions means leaving it where it is, in front of
them.  This location is at least visible on the screen in all cases, whereas the caret 
would disappear in the other mode if you insert more than n lines having the insertion 
point located less than n lines from the bottom of the window.  In such a case the editor
moves the caret only to the end of the last line of the window!

Further user profile entries known by the editor are:
= x25
'SelectionTypes'    from keyboard
'SelectionTypes'    from buttons
'HardCopy'          enabled
'Font'              GACHA20
+
The function of the first two has already been explained in 5.11.  You are allowed
to have both options enabled together.

The hardcopy entry enables the CTRL-P key.  This command writes the current bitmap
on the file Edit3i0.PICT,  3i0 = 0,1,...  Such pictures may be processed by 
hardcopy programs.  Pressing the middle and then also the left 
button is equivalent to CTRL-P.

The font feature is mainly for demonstration purposes.  The editor may be used with
any fixed-pitch font.  Having a larger font but fewer lines and less characters is
useful if you want to project the screen image and still get readable information.  As
a side effect of changing the font, the editor assumes selection feedback by
reverse video and ignores selection types.

1User guidance0 is tentatively achieved by 
the dialog with the user through the message window which is done in a somewhat
systematic manner:  There are messages indicating the state of the system during
long lasting operations (like FIND).  There are messages prompting the user for an
action (like entering a filename).  The possible options for such a situation are
enumerated in square brackets.  There are error messages informing the user about
an action the system cannot handle.  And finally there are messages indicating the 
last operation performed.  This last type of messages appears only on request (to
be given with the HELP key).

The other general purpose key is ESC.  ESC lets you escape from almost any 
situation.  It cancels the selection or the selection type, it cancels entering 
a file name or a
search string, and it lets you also return from opening or closing a document.
B Y20
5.13.  Special Characters
+
The editor supports six umlaut characters: Ä, Å, Ç, É, Ñ, and Ö.  The following table
shows their encoding on a disk file and by which keys they may be generated:
t150,250,350.
- f0
 Ä  200B  SHIFT-"@"
 Å  201B  SHIFT-"^"
 Ç  202B  SHIFT-"\"
 É  203B  "@"
 Ñ  204B  "^"
 Ö  205B  "\"
+
But as
you see it is also possible, to generate the ASCII characters `, ~, |, @, ^, and
\.  The three keys "@", "^", and "\" may be switched to ASCII mode back and forth 
with CTRL-T or the key labeled
FORMAT.  You may control the mode in which the editor should start by an entry
in the user profile.
