A c
SIL: An Editor for Line Drawings
/c
N.Wirth, ETH Zurich
June 1981, rev. 11.2.1983  (Version 5)
+ Y12
Purpose: SIL is used for constructing and editing line drawings such as
charts, tables in illustrations, and circuit diagrams.  These drawings
may contain 1horizontal and vertical lines, text, and symbols0
- so-called macros - available from macro-libraries. These libraries
typically contain symbols for electronic components.
+
You should read this introduction carefully while having a Lilith
computer at your disposal in order to immediately follow the instructions
given.

When called, SIL asks: "Profile:".  Answer by typing a blank, (or "c",
if you wish to draw an electronic circuit).
B
Creating objects
+
When SIL is called, an input file is requested, because usually one
wishes to work on an already existing diagram.  If no file is to be read,
merely type ESC. Now you may create objects, i.e. elements of a diagram.
 A 1line0 is created by moving the cursor to the position where the
line is to begin, pushing the left key of the mouse (called the 1draw
key0), then, while keeping the key depressed, moving the cursor to the
position where the endpoint is to be, and releasing the key.  The line
will automatically be made either horizontal or vertical. Try it a few
times!

Now let's create a 1text.0  Move the cursor to the position
where you wish the text to begin.  Then simply type it!  You may type any
printable character, including blanks.  RETURN will terminate the text;
textual objects consist of sequences of words on a single line only.  The
character DEL can be used to make quick corrections of typing errors; it
causes the last character(s) to be erased. Try inserting a few textual
objects, each time moving the cursor to another position after typing
RETURN.
B
Operations on objects
+
As we now have a few objects on the screen, we are ready to see what SIL
can do to them.  In essence, it can 1move, copy,0 and 1delete0 them.
 In order to designate an object to which such a command applies, we have
to 1select0 that object.  In order to select a line, point at it with
the cursor, then press the right key of the mouse (called the 1select
key0), and release it.  Selection of a line is shown by the line being
dotted, selection of a text by underlining.  (You should have noticed
this when creating lines: a created line is automatically selected.)  If
you wish to undo a selection, simply point at a place where there is no
object.  Try selection a few times.

Let us now  1move0 a selected object to another place:
Point at it, then press the draw (left) key of the mouse and move the
cursor, while keeping the key depressed.  Before releasing the key, click
the middle key.  When you release the key, the selected object will be
moved to the new place.  In fact, when you move, you need not necessarily
point at the selected object.  The distance you travel while holding the
key down is what determines the move of the object; this distance is
called 1the translation vector.0

A move command applies to all selected objects simultaneously.  We can
select several objects either by selecting them one after the other or by
a so-called area selection.  This works as follows: the cursor is moved
while the select key is held, and this causes the selection of all objects
lying entirely within the rectangle whose diagonal is the described
translation vector.  Try area selection now!  Another way to select
several objets is by clicking the middle key while holding the select key.
 This prevents previously selected objects from being deselected.

Another important operation that can be performed on (groups of) objects
is 1copying0.  Select a number of objects, then press the draw (left)
key and, while moving the cursor and holding the key, also click the
right key.  The objects will be copied.  The place of the copies is
determined, as in the case of moving, by the translation vector travelled
by the cursor.  We summarize:
/ x50 t120.
draw:  left key
move:  left and middle keys
copy:  left and right keys
select:  right key (or right and middle)
+
The third fundamental operation is 1deletion0.  Select an
object, then hit the DEL (or the ESC) key of the keyboard.  It will erase
all selected objects.  But be careful, there is no way to retrieve them!
B
Other commands, the menu
+
Now we have learned the most common, most important, and most frequently
used operations performed with SIL.  But there are a few more offerings!
 Press the middle key, called the 1menu key0.  A so-called menu will
appear at the place of the cursor.  It contains the following selection
of commands:
c
grid, width, font, put, get, mac0, mac1, exit.
+
One of these commands is shown white on black, i.e. 1inverted0; this
signifies that it is selected.  When you release the menu key, the
selected command will be executed.  You can change selection by moving
the mouse up or down.  If you move outside the menu, no command is
selected, and upon releasing the key no command is executed.

For a start, select the 1width0 command and move the mouse to the right.
 Another menu appears which offers four
different line widths, namely 1, 2, 3 and 4.  The one currently selected
is again shown white on black.  Move the mouse up or down and select the
desired value.  Then release the key.  If you subsequently draw a line,
it will have that width.

You may have noticed that the cursor does not move smoothly on the
screen, but rather jumps on a fine, invisible grid.  This is intentional
to make exact positioning more easily possible.  The width of this grid
can also be changed.  Get the menu, select the 1grid0 command, and move
to the right: a new menu shows you the current grid width, and allows you
to select among the values 1, 2, 4, and 8.

The 1font0 command operates
similarly and lets you choose among four fonts.  The one selected
determines the style of text typed in.  There are four fonts; they
are selected at the start of the session according to specifications
on your User Profile.  (SIL allows you to select among two specifications
by accepting a blank or "c").  The standard groups are the following;
the right one is intended for circuit design:
- x50 t150 250.
0  HELVETICA12   HELVETICA12
1  HELVETICA16   HELVETICA8
2  HELVETICA12I  HELVETICA8I
3  HELVETICA20S  SYMBOL32
+
Now try to draw lines of different widths and text in different fonts
using different grid spacings.  If you are satisfied, return to the
default values (width = 1, grid = 4, font = HELVETICA12).

The 1exit0 command requires a confirmation.  Be sure you have written
your drawing on a file (see below) before quitting.  Confirmation by
typing "y" (for yes) terminates your SIL session.  Confirmation with "r"
clears the screen and resets SIL such that you may start a new drawing.
B
Input and output of diagrams 
+
The 1get0 command allows to input a SIL picture that was previously
saved by a put command on a disk file.  Select the get command; SIL writes
the message "file:" on the screen, asking you to input the desired file
name.  In typing the name, you may use the DEL key to correct typing
errors.  If the given name ends with a period, SIL automatically appends
the name extension .SIL.  Blank or RETURN activates the command, ESC
cancels it.

Try this command by getting the file "Summary.SIL".  Use it to exercise
the commands learned above.  In order to see the maximum area of a page,
read the file 1frame.SIL0

The 1put0 command serves to write a diagram onto a file.  The command
is prompted with the message "file:" followed by the name
of the last input file.  A new name can now be entered; merely typing
RETURN causes the old file name to be retained.  In this case, the
existing file is overwritten.
B
Hints for drawing
+
When drawing a sequence of connected lines, draw them in a single
sequence.  For example, draw the four lines forming a rectangle in either
clockwise or counterclockwise direction.  This avoids corners being
cut out.  (See samples).

Sometimes deletion of an object causes parts of other objects to become
erased.  If you wish to obtain a clean drawing again, type LINE FEED.

The font HELVETICA20S contains various special characters for symbols
that frequently occur in diagrams.  They allow you to draw arrows,
diagonal lines, line markers, arcs, and differently shaded areas.  Check
the attached examples.  The special characters are listed on the page
titled "Sil-Summary".
B
Macros (for circuit design)
+
Now press the menu key and select the command 1mac00.  When releasing
the key, the imperative 1type code!0 appears on the screen, asking you
to type a so-called macro code character which determines the macro to be
drawn.  Macros are symbols composed of texts and lines.  For example,
type "A".  Then the symbol for a NAND gate is drawn, because A is the code character for a NAND gate.  Selection of a mocro is indicated by covering
the symbol by a dot pattern.  Try to move and copy macros now.

Note that macros are available only if specified in the User Profile.
There are two macro "libraries", selectable by the commands mac0 and mac1.
 Their contents and the association of code characters with symbols are
specified in a document entitled 1Dictionnary of SIL Macros.0

When drawing circuit diagrams, start out by reading the file 1form.SIL0
B
Rare commands
+
Miscellaneous rare commands are activated by control keys on the keyboard.
 They are:

The screen is covered by a pattern of dots, the so-called 1ticks.0  They
help in developing diagrams and in positioning picture elements.  These
ticks do not belong to the diagram, and can be erased and redrawn by
typing <cntl>t (i.e. pressing the CTRL and t keys at the same time).  The
command acts as a toggle switch turning the ticks on and off.  The grid
spacing is 16.

Another toggle switch is activated by typing <cntl>u.  This switch alters
among two 1keyboard modes,0 namely ASCII-mode and Umlaut-mode.  In the
Umlaut mode, the following character translation occurs:
/ t200 300.
 typed  written
   @      É
   ^      Ñ
   \      Ö
   `      Ä
   ~      Å
   |      Ç
   $    Omega in fonts HELVETICA8
+
The actual picture area corresponds to an A4-page.  If you are using a
horizontal display screen, only either the upper or lower part of the
page is shown.  Typing <cntl>n switches between the two parts.  The full
picture area is 640 dots wide and 832 dots high.
B
Hardcopy
+
A hardcopy of a SIL-page is obtained by calling the program 1silprint0,
which sends the file to your printer server.  Type the file name (when
ending with a period, the program automatically appends the default
extension SIL).  Then type a single digit to indicate the number of
copies desired.  The program then asks for another file, thus allowing
to print a collection of pages in sequence.  The process is terminated
by typing ESC.
B
Program SilCheck
+
In SIL documents, it is impossible to see whether or not several elements
are either overlapping or even fully covering others.  It is highly
desirable to avoid overlapping elements, because they do not contribute
to the picture but only add to the length of the SIL file.  Also, if
a line is drawn by adjoining pieces instead of in a single piece, it
makes life hard for analyzing programs such as e.g. a wirelist generator.
 The program 1SilCheck0 detects and indicates such overlaps.  With its
ais, redundant elements can then be eliminated with SIL according to the
following recipe.

Call SilCheck and generate a so-called checkfile for each document to be
inspected. SilCheck repeatedly requests an input file name (default
extension SIL) and an output file name (default extension CK.SIL).  After
generating the check files, call SIL, first reading the file  xxx.CK.SIL.
 SIL now shows all instances of overlapping items detected.  Now get the
original file  xxx.SIL  and start deleting the overlapping lines and
those supplied by the check file.  Note that you may have to regenerate
the picture quite often to see the remaining elements buried under the
deleted ones. Use <cntl>n for this purpose.  After all redundant elements
had been deleted, write the output file.  Then check it again using
SilCheck.

SilCheck detects three cases of overlapping elements: horizontal lines of
height 1, vertical lines of width 1, and texts.  It indicates the
overlapping elements by a line of width 2 (underlining in the case of
text).  Adjacent lines are also indicated, even if they do not overlap.
B
Installation Hints
+
In order to install SIL, you need the files SYS.sil.OBJ (and SilCheck.OBJ)
and the font and macro files as specified in your User Profile.
Documentation is on files  SilDoc.TEXT and Summary.SIL.  Furthermore, you
may need the files form1 and form2.SIL.  The recommended entries in the
profile are:
/ x50 t200.
"SIL"
'F0'    HELVETICA12
'F1'    HELVETICA16
'F2'    HELVETICA12I
'F3'    HELVETICA20S
'FMenu' HEL12|HEL16|HEL12I|HEL20||
'M0'    0
'M1'    0

"SILc"
'F0'    HELVETICA12
'F1'    HELVETICA8
'F2'    HELVETICA8I
'F3'    SYMBOL32
'FMenu' HEL12|HEL8|HEL8I|SYM32||
'M0'    MACRO1
'M1'    MACRO2
<
Note: Do not change font F0 (and F1 and F3 in SILc)
< Y20
File: SilDoc.TEXT
